---
layout: post
title:  "Complete Guide to Dips and Chutneys"
author: tarun
categories: [ basic, dip, chutney ]
image: assets/images/Dip/dip2.jpg
featured: true
hidden: true
---

> Make the perfect accompaniment for every dish, your own way!

Dips or chutneys as we like to call it, add a new dimension to every dish, without overpowering the dish. 
Imagine having your paratha without some fresh coriander mint chutney, fries without a good tomato dip, idli without the simple coconut chutney or momos without the fiery red hot chutney. Urghhhhh! That's painful.

So, let's understand what makes a good chutney, how to build it according to your requirements and convert one variety to multiple. I will also show you a few examples to give you some headstart. 

Let's begin, *shall we*?

### ❖ Components of Chutney

1. Base         :    Body of dish - coconut, peanut, coriander, tomato, tamarind, dates
2. Thickener    :    Required if the base doesn't provide good body - Roasted chickpeas, peanuts, cashew, almond
3. Freshness    :    Life of dish - green chilli, ginger, lemon, mint, coriander
4. Seasoning    :    Balance      - Salt, garlic, pepper, chilli, chaat masala
5. Tempering    :    Reinvent     - Oil, Mustard, curry leaves
6. Preservative :    Shelf Life   - Vinegar, Oil

Above, you see some basic components of a chutney listed out, with examples for each. The listed examples mentioned are not exhaustive and you can find substitutes/additions to your own liking.

#### ❖ Base and Thickener

These two components together define the body and the base flavour making them very important. And well, usually the base defines the name of chutney too. Peanut chutney, coconut chutney, coriander chutney, you see? :)

What makes a good base? Something not too strong in flavour, and well, that's about it. Peanut, coconut and tomato are thick ingredients and don't need a thickener to support the dish. 
However, we do need a thickener for coriander or mint chutney, since it can't stand on its own. You could add some peanuts, roasted chickpeas or onion to give structure to it.


#### ❖ Cook the base?

Cooking the base does two things:

- Gives more depth to flavour which changes quite a lot from the raw stage. You lose freshness though.
- Increases shelf life by reducing water content. 

You can decide whether to cook it or not depending on the requirement.

Most chutneys are usually uncooked: coriander is well known for its freshness, hence not cooked. Same for coconut chutney. Peanuts are usually lightly toasted to give a better flavour. Cooking tomatoes varies, but it is usually cooked anywhere between *slightly* to *a lot* depending on the dish. Some ingredients like tamarind and dates *need* cooking to fully extract the flavour since the fibrous pulp will be strained out later.

#### ❖ Freshness

Believe it or not, this is what separates a good chutney from an excellent one. Find the right pairings here and make your loved ones happy. :)  

Green chillies according to your spice level, ginger for a strong fresh flavour, lemon for some nice fresh citric punch, and mint/coriander for fresh comforting herbiness (is that even a word?).

For example, you could always add some green chilli and ginger in all chutneys but avoid lemon in tomato/tamarind ones as they are already sour. 

#### ❖ Seasoning

Salt and masalas? Always in the end! Try to restrict yourself to using nothing other than salt in a simple chutney but feel free to try other stuff by separating some chutney and seasoning in small batches for tasting. 

Garlic? I believe it adds a subtle extra flavour like seasoning, although you will need to add garlic in the base stage. :P

#### ❖ Tempering

A fresh tadka/temper really lifts up your chutney, but be careful, it's not always required. :) 

All chutneys are complete enough without this step, but some relatively less spicy/bland ones can do with a little bit of tadka. Plus, with this step, you can add some urad dal/ sesame seeds in temper to provide some crunch!

#### ❖ Preservative

Usually chutneys are best consumed fresh, but you could add oil and a very small amount of vinegar during the cooking process to increase shelf life. 

### ❖ Bringing it All Together

Now that we have understood each component very well, let's use the knowledge to build a simple coconut chutney. 

- **Base/Thickener**   : Fresh Coconut - 200gms, Peanuts - 10
- **Freshness**        : Ginger - 1 inch, Green Chillis - 3
- **Seasoning**        : Salt
- **Tempering/Tadka**  : Oil - 2tbsp, mustard seeds, curry leaves, urad dal, dry red chilly

Make a smooth (or a little coarse) puree of coconut, peanuts, ginger and green chilli in a mixer blender, adding water as per requirement. Season with salt as required. Then just before serving, prepare a tadka with the given ingredients, pour, mix and serve. :)

I hope to have provided you all with substantial info to build your own chutney. Now, head to the kitchen, get creative and be generous to share the recipe with everyone. Comment here or mail me on how it turns out! :)

I aim to cover a few more examples along with non-Indian dips and the dry chutney cheat sheet in another article. Stay tuned.

*Until then...*