---
layout: post
title:  "Rava | Versatality Redefined"
author: tarun
categories: [ basic, ingredient  ]
image: assets/images/Rava/rava1.jpg
featured: true
hidden: true
---

Multipurpose, Foolproof, Must-have, Life-saver, Quick and Easy. :)

Some of the multiple pros I could find for today's featured ingredient "Rava" or "Semolina" or "Sooji". It can be the main ingredient of multiple dishes in various forms, can also act as a catalyst or a saviour in some cases. In this blog, I'll take you through the basic techniques, uses of Rava and how you can use it to create something of your own.

### What is Rava?

A coarse by-product of wheat milling process for flour. 
Basically, healthy and you can use it without worrying about anything. :)

### Uniqueness

- Its grain size is much bigger than flour but significantly smaller than pulses, allowing Rava to give a new direction to the dish. 

- Rava is the *sponge* in your kitchen. It can absorb upto 4 times water in volume!!!!

- You can use it to make dishes that hold their shape, or dishes that can flow (semi-solid). 

- Can be used for both sweet and savoury dishes.

Looks interesting and exciting, isn't it? Well, it is. Sorry for a 10th grade exam style answer though. :P
Let me now come to how you can achieve the above mentioned results. 

### Cheat Sheets
<p style="text-align:center;">
Rava + Water -> Semi Solid Flowy Dish (Upma, Halwa/Sheera) 
</p>
<p style="text-align:center;">
Rava + Curd + Water -> Spongy Solid Dish (Dhokla, Idli, Uttapam)
</p>

### Upma, Halwa

Roast your rava in ghee(Only Ghee please!) for 3-4 minutes on low flame until you get a mild aroma. This is your base. 

Now for upma, add tadka(mustard, jeera) in ghee, saute some veggies, add rava, salt and warm water (4 times in volume to rava). Let it cook for some time and garnish with lime and coriander.

If you are making halwa, add warm water + warm milk (2 parts of water, 2 parts of milk to 1 part of rava), sugar (quarter part) and some flavour(kesar, elaichi, dry fruits).

In short, you need a Ghee Roasted Rava as the base, and then you can use it with appropriate ingredients to create your own upma, halwa or both :P

### Spongy Solid Dish

Here, you need your item to hold its structure together and this is where the curd comes into the picture. It helps bind the batter well together and also gives those air pockets to make the final dish spongy. Again, make a base.

1 part Rava + 1 part Curd + 2 parts Water + Salt. Rest this for 30 minutes. This is your base. Now you can add finely chopped veggies or some chillis and coriander to the mixture as per your choice. If you are making uttapam, spread this on a hot tava and cook nice soft uttapams with some oil/butter/ghee. For the idli and dhokla, ready a steamer, add a pinch of baking soda in the batter, mix and steam the batter in the right container for dhokla or idli. You can finish the dhokla with mustard and chilli oil tempering. 

### Bonus

- Add Rava (1bsp to 1 cup flour) while making dough for puris/bhaturas. It will help them retain the fluffed up structure for a much longer time.

- Made a batter/dough which is a little too watery? No worries, add some rava and keep aside for 30 mins. Rava will soak up the water like nothing else can. 

- Add Rava to any traditional flour mixture to give it a new slightly coarse texture. 

So, what are you waiting for? Stock up some bags of this beautiful ingredient and use the techniques I mentioned to cook up some quick, easy, healthy food. 

Need a more detailed recipe? They are coming soon, don't worry. I just wanted to demonstrate the power of Rava here. Or you can always contact me here, or comment below for a query. 

See you all soon!

Until then, Stay Safe, Smile and Cook. :D