---
layout: post
title:  "The Mystery Flavour Bomb - Umami"
categories: [ basic, taste, umami ]
image: assets/images/umami/umami.jpg
featured: true
hidden: true
---

> How do you describe a new primary colour to someone? You point at the sky, or the lake and say, "You see that? That's blue".  
> It is almost the same while describing a new elementary taste - *Umami*, it being the newest and least known flavour. 

Umami is heavenly, found in many naturally occurring foods. You already love the taste and crave for it, but you don't know!  
Today, let me take you through this new taste, how to identify it, how to introduce it to your food and how to satisfy your Umami cravings at will.

### ❖ The Taste

Think Ketchup, why do you happen to like it so much? Many people just add it to any food they find, and it elevates the experience. Why?

Think Mushrooms, or well cooked meat. They have their own savouriness which doesn't come from outside spices. How?

Think Soya sauce, ever tried to lick just a bit of it? Such a deep savoury flavour, and your chinese food is incomplete without it. What is it?

Think packed cheap fryums you get in stores, they cost just ₹5 but taste surprisingly good and make you want to keep eating it. Secret?


Many questions, 1 answer - ***Umami***. Umami is what you tasted in all the above scenarios and that is why those foods are so addictive. 

According to Wikipedia, Umami has a mild but lasting aftertaste associated with salivation and a sensation of furriness on the tongue, stimulating the throat, the roof and the back of the mouth.

- Umami taste spreads across the tongue
- Umami lasts longer than other basic tastes
- Umami provides a mouthwatering sensation

The mystery now seems to be slowly solving itself, no? Let's keep going.

### ❖ The Discovery

Kikunae Ikeda first scientifically identified Umami in 1908, while intensely checking Ramen broth for its flavours. One flavour stood out, originating from fish, seaweed and mushrooms, which he identified as "Umami", which translates to "pleasant savory taste".  But it was officially recognised as a primary flavour only in 1985, and hence it is still very unknown. 


### ❖ The Sources, Heavenly Umami Sources

Umami comes from the glutamates in your food, highly abundant in the items I had mentioned earlier. But if I were to categorize foods and give you a formula for identifying Umami, it is ***time***. Foods allowed to age: *ferment, ripen, dried,* develop a much richer Umami flavour than the usual foods.

‣ **Ripe tomatoes** : *Ketchup, red sauce in pizza and pasta.*  
‣ **Mushrooms** : *Ultimate umami for vegetarians. Dried mushrooms have stronger umami.*  
‣ **Fermented Sauces** : *Soya sauce, miso paste, korean sauces, most of them are made using fermentation. Also, oyster sauce, fish sauce.* ***Umami Bomb for seasoning.***   
‣ **Aged Cheese** : *Parmesan cheese is the most famous! But any aged cheese brings in lot of umami.*   
‣ **Aged Meat** : *Meats naturally have lot of umami*  
‣ **Pure Umami** : *Ajinomoto or MSG*   

### ❖ Umami Dishes and Cuisines 

***Asian cuisine*** is very umami based. Their use of umami sauces like *soya, oyster, fish, black bean, red bean* is integral to the cuisine. The broths used in their food also borrow umami from the use of meat and mushrooms. Not a surprise that the flavour was discovered in Japan, the birth of Umami. 

Surprisingly, ***Italian cuisine*** also uses Umami flavour in it's food quite well. The use of aged cheese and ripe tomatoes make their simple food so yummy and so famous all across the world. The best Italian sauce is inspired from the freshest tomatoes with hardly any addition of condiments or spices. 
We Indians love Umami and you see, that's why we prefer *white sauce* (Cheese umami) and *red sauce*(Tomato umami) much more than the herb based sauces like pesto.

Indian food isn't really umami based, and our heavy use of spices don't allow the items used to showcase their Umami enough. Heck, I couldn't even find what Umami is called in any of the Indian languages!  
But there is still one Indian umami spice - *Hing*  or *Asoefotida*.
Very strong and pungent flavour but it is used very well in Indian dishes during tadka. However, we often use spices over that and the umami doesn't stand out.


And folks, that was umami for you, in all its glory. I hope you use it well in your dishes and surprise your guests with a flavour bomb. Keep cooking!


Do you have any suggestions or requests for a particular technique, cuisine or ingredient? You can drop them easily right <a href="https://swaad.in.net/requests">here</a>.

You can also subscribe to my weekly FoodLetter <a href="https://swaad.in.net/subscribe">here</a> if you haven't yet. Receive all blog and other updates right in your inbox!

*Until then...*
