---
layout: post
title:  "Dough | Kneads and Needs"
author: tarun
categories: [ basic, flour, dough ]
image: assets/images/Dough/dough2.jpg
featured: true
hidden: true
---

> A Rubbery, Sticky, Messy, Gooey, Never Ending ball of Water and Flour.

If this is what your understanding of dough is, let me help you a little. And if you already can form good shiny balls of dough, stick on, I have some info here for you pro folks as well. :)

I will start with the basics, break down a few important concepts, and then summarize it in the end to essentially give you a cheat sheet for your own dough, be it roti, naan, bread, pizza, or anything really. :P

### Understanding the Dough Basics

Honestly speaking, a simple dough requires just flour and water in approximately correct ratio. You mix them together to bring everything together in one big ball, and then use it as required. Done, easy, peasy, lemon squeezy? Ummm, yes, but not really...

You see I mentioned *correct ratio*? It's very important to know all the small little things going on behind this simple innocent process to know your ratio. Let me explain it to you.

#### Gluten

Don't worry, gluten is not a bad thing, it is what helps you stretch your Rotis and Bread without breaking down. When you knead the dough, gluten is developed, gluten bonds are formed between the fine flour grains. The more you allow the dough to rest, the more gluten you get, and your bread becomes better. 
Wheat Flour (Indian Roti Flour) generally has lesser gluten than Processed Flour/Maida. Hence, for many breads and soft naan, you see Maida is used thanks to its finer grain (implies softness).

You can shorten (or break) the gluten bonds in the dough using oil/butter/ghee. Why would one need this you ask? For something like Samosa or Kachori, where you have layers in that fried outer layer, the separation of layers is caused by introducing oils while kneading which helps in the beautiful separation of layers, and gives you a crispy texture. (Khasta is the Hindi word you are looking for)

#### Water

Well, you add water in the flour to help bring the dough together, obviously, duh!
And that helps develop the gluten in the dough as we saw earlier.

Now, how much water you add is very very important!

The ratio of water by weight to flour by weight is called the Hydration level of dough, just letting you know the jargon if you come across it in any fancy blogs, thanks. :P

Why does the ratio matter? Because it depends on how you are cooking.

>Water after converting to steam is what puffs up your roti and rises your bread in the oven.

If you cook it for a long time, a lot of water will just evaporate before the rising happens and you will be left with a frisbee. So, we can't use less water. 

For Indian rotis, naan, water is approximately 50-55% of flour by weight. For anything going inside oven for a long time, you will need a higher water ratio, around 60-65% to avoid getting a brick. :)


#### Kneading

> Knead with confidence, don't be scared and the dough won't stick.

Really, that's it. Many people try to mix the flour with fingers, which leaves you with a mess. Use the bottom of your palm, push with intent and the dough will come together before you know. The more time you give the dough to develop gluten without coming together, the harder you are making for yourself.

1. Pour 1 part dough
2. Pour 1/2 part water
3. Bring them together, all the bits and pieces together using your entire palm.
4. Add more water as needed.
5. Once you get one big ball of dough, you can massage it for a while, then coat it with 1tsp of oil and cover it with a moist cloth. :)

Protip: Use a spoon to roughly bring the dough together in step 3, leave it for 20 mins (*autolysis* happens). Then move on to step 4 and 5. You will save some messy hands. 

### Master CheatSheet for Every Dough

- Long cooking time -> More water, Less cooking time -> less Water
- Oil in the dough before kneading -> dough has layers, crispy texture, not a soft outcome. 
  More the oil, more the layers. 
  Think cookie, it has lots of butter in dough, and that is why it crumbles. 
- Oil coated on the dough after kneading -> Lightens the dough, gives you a nice soft result.
- Season your dough as required but keep it simple. Add salt and that's enough. But you can season it will small quantities of other masala or herbs according to your dish.
- Processed Flour -> Softer, stretchier dough (and becomes rubber if you let the naan cool down :D) 
  Wheat Flour  -> Soft but relatively harder and less stretchy dough (more nutritious than Processed Flour)


And well, that's it for now. There are more things to cover for rising doughs (leavening agents) which I will soon in another article, but today's points hold true for them too. You are currently ready with all the needs to knead the basic dough for yourself. 


Head to your kitchen, grab some flour and water, ~~dirty your hands~~ and fill some hungry stomachs! :)

*Until next time...*


